Modern electric motors are wonderful devices,
but there are limits to their performance.
There is a maximum acceleration, a maximum
velocity and a maximum power.
So, let’s look first at what limits the
acceleration of a motor. We have rearranged
an earlier equation in to this form here,
the ratio of the motor torque to the motor
inertia. Clearly because inertia is in the
denominator, if we increase inertia, we are
going to reduce the acceleration. The inertia
that the motor experiences has got two components.
One of those components is the inertia of
the motor’s armature. That’s the rotating
part of electric motor that I denote by J
sub m. The other inertia that the motor experiences
is due to the link itself.
In this case, I have drawn a very simple rectangular
prism for the link and the inertia of that
is M times R squared. The R squared is problematic
because it means that the inertia grows very
quickly with the size of the link.
So, we can write the total inertia that the
motor experiences in terms of these two components,
the motor armature inertia which is a constant
and the inertia of the link. And, in this
simple case, the inertia of the link is a
constant. But, for a real robot, the inertia
is going to depend on the configuration of
all the links that are attached to the end
of this particular link and also to the payload
which is held by the last link in the chain.
So, the link inertia is going to be highly
variable. However, in a real robot, there's
typically a gearbox between the motor and
the link and this is another advantage of
the gearbox because it allows me to write
the expression for inertia like this.
The inertia of the link is reduced by a factor
of G squared. And, for a robot like the Puma,
G is a number anywhere between say 10 and
a 100. So, the link inertia is going to be
greatly reduced. It means that the inertia
that the motor control system is going to
“see” is dominated by the constant motor armature
inertia.
Variation in inertia due to link configuration
change is going to be very, very small. If
we consider now the numerator of the expression
at the top, we know that the maximum torque
depends on the maximum current. The maximum
possible current is a function of the power
amplifier which supplies current to the motor.
If we apply too much current to the motor,
the armature and the brushes will overheat
and be damaged.
Also, remember that some of the torque generated
by the motor is used to oppose friction and
also to oppose gravity in the motor. So, less
of it is actually available for acceleration.
What we have defined here is an upper bound
on the maximum acceleration of the robot joint.
Turning now to the maximum velocity
the electrical model for the motor contains
a generator, the circle is the back EMF source, and
as the motor rotates faster and faster, the
back EMF rises. And, when the back EMF equals
the applied voltage, then no further current
can flow in to motor. It will stop accelerating
and that will define the maximum speed of
the motor given by an equation like this.
The electrical power in to the motor is given
by the product of the applied voltage and
current. The mechanical power out of the motor
is the product of speed and the torque. We
can plot motor torque against motor speed
and there are other two critical points on
this curve.
One point is when the motor has got no load
at all and it’s spinning as fast as it possibly
can. We refer to this as the no load speed.
At the other end of the line, the motor is
stalled. It’s not actually rotating but
it is exerting a torque and we refer to this
as the stall torque.
Power is a quadratic function of speed has
a maximum somewhere in the middle of the operating
speed range of the motor and the motor cannot
be operated for a sustained period of time
above its maximum power rating or else it
will be damaged through overheating.